= Setting up Chrome Remote Desktop on Ubuntu
:toc:

The upstream documentation is a little bit scattered, not always
entirely complete, and the Ubuntu package provided needs some poking
to work. Hence this summary.

The two main sources of information I found are:

  * An old product forum post: https://productforums.google.com/forum/#!topic/chrome/8PMxG69VJ6o
  * This documentation (under "Enable remote access to your computer"): https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/1649523?hl=en

At the time of this writing, this was written retroactively and I have
not done a full run of the instructions from scratch. There may be
mistakes.

== Overview of how remote-desktop works

The Linux version of chrome remote desktop (henceforth, CRD) doesn't
allow clients to connect and control an existing X session; rather,
there is a dedicated X session specific to CRD. This is similar to the
classic vncserver mechanic. When you connect, a session is started if
one is not already running. If it is running, you are connected to the
in-progress session.

Initial setup still requires a non-headless environment: A running
Chrome (until someone or Google makes a tool that generates the
necessary on-disk state in your home directory for authorizing remote
access).

Once set up however, CRD is completely headless. It starts on boot-up
as a service, and can be restarted, through an init script. For
example:

  sudo /etc/init.d/chrome-remote-desktop restart

It determines which users should have CRD running based on which users
are part of the `chrome-remote-desktop` Unix group.

== Why Chrome Remote Desktop instead of `$OTHER_OPTION`?

Mostly:

  * It works natively on ChromeOS, and works well. It handles hi-dpi displays
    correctly, and passes through keyboard combinations correctly (e.g., it stops
    CTRL-N from opening a new local window).
  * It seems faster than any other remote desktop option I have tried. I don't know
    technical details, but likely their use of some kind of modified VP9 codec
    has to do with this (but fear not: as far as I can tell, reproduction is pixel
    perfect and not lossy).

== Setup instructions

=== Install the package

Download the package linked from https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/1649523?hl=en

=== Prepare the chrome-remote-desktop group

At the time of this writing, the package installer seems to fail to
create the `chrome-remote-desktop` group, so add it:

  sudo groupadd chrome-remote-desktop

You _may_ need to add yourself to the group (unclear if this happens
correctly automatically):

  sudo usermod -a -G chrome-remote-desktop $USER

=== Set up the desktop session

If `~/.chrome-remote-desktop-session` is missing or containing bad
information, the attempt to connect to the remote desktop will fail
without a clear cause. Example:

  #!/bin/bash

  xterm &
  exec i3

=== Set up your desired resolution in your shell profile

Wherever your shell profile is, add an appropriate resolution selection:

  export CHROME_REMOTE_DESKTOP_DEFAULT_DESKTOP_SIZES=1024x768

=== Bootstrap through SSH+VNC

On the server:

  sudo apt-get install vnc4server
  vncpasswd
  vncserver

  # log in remotely and bootstrap chrome (see later)

  vncserver -kill :1

On the client, log into the server using a VNC client over SSH
forwarding. I.e:

  ssh -L 5901:localhost:5901 username@remotehost

And run your preferred VNC client to connect to localhost:5901.
